docs/Setting up a Java development environment for Fiji and friends.md, before:

# Setting up a Java development environment for Fiji and friends.

The goal of this 'homework' is to have you set up the main tools required to develop for Fiji and other related softwares using the Java programming language. With them, you are all set for the course, ready to program on day 1. Of course, given the audience of the course it is likely that some if not all these tools are already installed on your laptop. Nonetheless, please check that you have all of them, so that we all share a common development environment. 

So this homework is mainly made of installation instructions for various piece of programming softwares. It is best to follow the order of this text, as it abides tool dependencies. We also try to cover several platforms (Windows, Mac OSX, Linux). If something goes wrong, it is likely that the text is wrong. In that case contact Jean-Yves (jeanyves.tinevez@gmail.com) so that he fixes it.

Careful, doing all the installation below can be quite long, particularly if things go wrong.

----------


## Java SE Development Kit.

Most computers have the software installed needed to run Java programs. This is the Java SE Runtime Environment (JRE). We want to develop Java programs, so we need the Java Development Kit (JDK) which is not installed by default. 

As of 2017, Fiji and friends require at least Java 8. Packages can be found on [Oracle webpage](http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/downloads/jdk8-downloads-2133151.html). Pick the latest version for your platform. Very important: we need a 64-bit computer with the 64-bit compatible libraries, so only take the `XXXX-x64` version of the JDK.

On **Mac-OS-X**, the installation package is a `dmg` file that contains a `JDK 8 Update XXX.pkg`  file. After installation, the JDK files can be found in a folder named `/Library/Java/JavaVirtualMachines/jdk1.8.0_XXX.jdk`. If you browse with a terminal in the folder `Contents/Home/bin` of the aforementioned folder, you will see that there is a list of executable files, one of them being `java`. Running `./java -version` from this folder should yield something in the line of:

    java version "1.8.0_111"
	Java(TM) SE Runtime Environment (build 1.8.0_111-b14)
	Java HotSpot(TM) 64-Bit Server VM (build 25.111-b14, mixed mode)


----------


## Git - the version control system.

We now need a tool to fetch and manage the code as files, and track the edits we make to them. To do so in an orderly manner, we use a version control system ([VCS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Version_control)). 

A version control system allows us to fetch a codebase we want to work on. When you edit a file, or create a new one (corresponding to a Java class, a Java interface, an icon file, _etc._), the *changes* you made are recorded and logged by the VCS. It is a great tool if you need to undo a change you made, or to branch the code to experiment with it, or to properly communicate to other what you did. It is so useful that we (the Fiji community) do not develop out of a VCS.

There are many of them, and in the Fiji ecosystem we use [Git](https://git-scm.com/) quasi exclusively. How to get it strongly depends on your platform.

### Git for Windows.

Several distributions of Git exist for Windows. Here we will rely on the *Git for Windows* distribution that can find [here](https://git-for-windows.github.io/). Interestingly, this package is nowadays maintained by the mother of Fiji, Johannes Schindelin.

This distribution ships several goodies such as a good terminal application (Git BASH) and GUIs for Git commands (`git gui`, `gitk`), particularly welcomed for Windows, as this platform is not natively well endowed for developers. 

### Git for Mac-OS-X.

Apple offers a version of Git through XCode, but we favor here a more recent version equipped with GUIs. Go on the [Git download](https://git-scm.com/downloads) webpage and pick the Mac-OS-X version. You will get a `dmg` file containing the installer and a useful README file.

### Testing Git installation and basic configuration.

Open a terminal and check that Git is properly installed with the paths set by typing: `git --version` in the shell. You should get something in line of 

	git version 2.6.4

It is a good idea to perform its basic configuration now. We want to tell it who we are and what is our email for instance. This is done with the `git config --global XXX` command:

```
git config --global user.email "you@yourdomain.com"
git config --global user.name "Your Name"
git config --global color.ui true
```
Then check that everything was properly recorded:
```
git config --list
```
----------


## Maven - the build automation tool.

Maven is the tool Fiji uses to build the code into an executable Java program. It does much more than simply compiling java files: it takes care of the dependencies of your software in an automated manner, but we have to comply to a certain organisation of the code. 

Maven is a software written in Java, so the installation procedure changes a little from what we are used to on our respective platforms. First go to the [download page of Maven](https://maven.apache.org/download.cgi) and pick one of the binary distribution (_e.g._ `apache-maven-x.y.z-bin.zip`). 

Unzip it and copy the whole ``apache-maven-x.y.z` folder somewhere convenient. For instance, I recommend creating a `Development` folder in your `home` that we will use as workspace for software development. We can put the Maven folder there.

We will use Maven from the command line, so we must add its executable to the shell path. Also, since Maven uses Java, we must properly declare where is the Java Development Kit we installed above. This requires some manipulation of the shell environment of your OS. In case of doubts, follow the instructions from the [Maven installation page](https://maven.apache.org/install.html). Here are some tips for common platforms.

### Maven on Mac-OS-X.

We will use the Mac-OS-X terminal, and the shell defaults to bash normally. Adding to the shell path can be done in the `.bash_profile` file in your home. To edit it, do something like this in a terminal:

```
cd # move to your home folder
vim .bash_profile # open an editor for bash_profile
```
Of course, the editor we use here is Vim, you might not like it. Any text editor will work. The important lines to add in the file are:

```
export PATH="$PATH:~/Development/Apache-maven-x.y.z/bin/"
```
this add the Maven `bin` folder to the shell path (or course, be mindful of the actual path to Maven and of the `x.y.z`), and:

```
export JAVA_HOME=/Library/Java/JavaVirtualMachines/jdk1.8.0_111.jdk/Contents/Home/
```
This creates a `JAVA_HOME` environment variable in the shell that points to the JDK home. This variable is used by Maven to run and compile Java programs. 

Once you did all of this, save the file and relaunch a terminal (so that the changes you made are read). In the new terminal, type `mvn -v`. You should get something like this:

```
Apache Maven 3.3.9 (bb52d8502b132ec0a5a3f4c09453c07478323dc5; 2015-11-10T17:41:47+01:00)
Maven home: /Users/tinevez/Development/Apache-maven-3.3.9
Java version: 1.8.0_111, vendor: Oracle Corporation
Java home: /Library/Java/JavaVirtualMachines/jdk1.8.0_74.jdk/Contents/Home/jre
Default locale: en_US, platform encoding: UTF-8
OS name: "mac os x", version: "10.11.6", arch: "x86_64", family: "mac"
```

### Maven on Windows.

On Windows, setting up properly the environment variables and the path is a little bit less simple. Depending on the version of Windows, the way to edit these changes. Here is a [useful tutorial](http://www.computerhope.com/issues/ch000549.htm) on who to do so. Then, please follow the instructions made by [Mkyong](https://www.mkyong.com/maven/how-to-install-maven-in-windows/) for the windows platform.

After doing so, log out and re-log in to your windows account to ensure the variable are sourced. Open the Git-BASH terminal provided by the Git for Windows tool we installed before, and type `mvn -v` to check that the Maven installation is correct.

----------


## Installing Fiji for development.

We typically develop Fiji plugins as a single code base, and have Fiji components as dependencies. For the test and deployment of the plugin, it is a good idea to have a functional Fiji installation that will 'receive' the new plugin. We can then test it in an environment identical to what the user will have. 

Maven does this for you, provided you give it some small configuration tweaks and a Fiji installation somewhere sensible. 

For instance, here is an excerpt of my (JYT) `Development` folder (I am on a Mac):
```
tinevez@lilium:~/Development$ ls -1
	Fiji.app
	TrackMate
```

`TrackMate` is a folder containing the TrackMate code: 
```
tinevez@lilium:~/Development$ ls TrackMate
README.md pom.xml   samples   scripts   src       target
```
and `Fiji.app` is the folder of a normal Fiji Mac installation:
```
tinevez@lilium:~/Development$ ls Fiji.app/
Contents   WELCOME.md images     java       macros     retro
README.md  db.xml.gz  jars       luts       plugins    scripts
```

In my TrackMate `pom.xml` file (and in almost all of my plugins, and most of the Fiji plugins made by others), I specify that the parent pom is the Fiji pom:
```
<parent>
	<groupId>sc.fiji</groupId>
	<artifactId>pom-fiji</artifactId>
	<version>24.3.0</version>
	<relativePath />
</parent>
```
This brings plenty of very useful defaults and managed dependencies version. There is also a small section that tells where to copy the plugin jar once it has been compiled:
```
<properties>
	<!-- Target Fiji dir for clean upload. -->
	<imagej.app.directory>../Fiji.app/</imagej.app.directory>
</properties>
```
This tells Maven to install the compiled TrackMate version in the Fiji app in the `Development` folder. For instance, after compiling TrackMate with Maven, I get (amongst other things) the following message:
```
[INFO] --- imagej-maven-plugin:0.6.0:copy-jars (copy-jars) @ TrackMate_ ---
[INFO] Copying TrackMate_-3.4.3-SNAPSHOT.jar to ../Fiji.app/plugins
[INFO] Deleted overridden TrackMate_-3.4.2.jar
```
and the same for all TrackMate dependencies. 

We will see the structure of a sensible `pom.xml` file for a Fiji plugin later. Right now, we just have to prepare a development workspace and put a clean Fiji installation on it. I suggest emulating the example we just surveyed: 

- Have a `Development` folder in your home. 
- Unzip a clean installation of Fiji in it. 
- Run it to make sure it works.

We will use this setup later.

----------


## Eclipse - integrated development environment.


----------


## GitHub - Git repository hosting.

Commit message:

Setting up dev environment: Eclipse and GitHub.

docs/Setting up a Java development environment for Fiji and friends.md, after:

# Setting up a Java development environment for Fiji and friends.

The goal of this 'homework' is to have you set up the main tools required to develop for Fiji and other related softwares using the Java programming language. With them, you are all set for the course, ready to program on day 1. Of course, given the audience of the course it is likely that some if not all these tools are already installed on your laptop. Nonetheless, please check that you have all of them, so that we all share a common development environment. 

So this homework is mainly made of installation instructions for various piece of programming softwares. It is best to follow the order of this text, as it abides tool dependencies. We also try to cover several platforms (Windows, Mac OSX, Linux). If something goes wrong, it is likely that the text is wrong. In that case contact Jean-Yves (jeanyves.tinevez@gmail.com) so that he fixes it.

Careful, doing all the installation below can be quite long, particularly if things go wrong.

----------


## Java SE Development Kit.

Most computers have the software installed needed to run Java programs. This is the Java SE Runtime Environment (JRE). We want to develop Java programs, so we need the Java Development Kit (JDK) which is not installed by default. 

As of 2017, Fiji and friends require at least Java 8. Packages can be found on [Oracle webpage](http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/downloads/jdk8-downloads-2133151.html). Pick the latest version for your platform. Very important: we need a 64-bit computer with the 64-bit compatible libraries, so only take the `XXXX-x64` version of the JDK.

On **Mac-OS-X**, the installation package is a `dmg` file that contains a `JDK 8 Update XXX.pkg`  file. After installation, the JDK files can be found in a folder named `/Library/Java/JavaVirtualMachines/jdk1.8.0_XXX.jdk`. If you browse with a terminal in the folder `Contents/Home/bin` of the aforementioned folder, you will see that there is a list of executable files, one of them being `java`. Running `./java -version` from this folder should yield something in the line of:

    java version "1.8.0_111"
	Java(TM) SE Runtime Environment (build 1.8.0_111-b14)
	Java HotSpot(TM) 64-Bit Server VM (build 25.111-b14, mixed mode)


----------


## Git - the version control system.

We now need a tool to fetch and manage the code as files, and track the edits we make to them. To do so in an orderly manner, we use a version control system ([VCS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Version_control)). 

A version control system allows us to fetch a codebase we want to work on. When you edit a file, or create a new one (corresponding to a Java class, a Java interface, an icon file, _etc._), the *changes* you made are recorded and logged by the VCS. It is a great tool if you need to undo a change you made, or to branch the code to experiment with it, or to properly communicate to other what you did. It is so useful that we (the Fiji community) do not develop out of a VCS.

There are many of them, and in the Fiji ecosystem we use [Git](https://git-scm.com/) quasi exclusively. Its proper use is so important for plugin developers that several pages on the ImageJ website are dedicated to Git. They are linked from the main [Git page on ImageJ.net](http://imagej.net/Git).

How to get it strongly depends on your platform.

### Git for Windows.

Several distributions of Git exist for Windows. Here we will rely on the *Git for Windows* distribution that can find [here](https://git-for-windows.github.io/). Interestingly, this package is nowadays maintained by the mother of Fiji, Johannes Schindelin.

This distribution ships several goodies such as a good terminal application (Git BASH) and GUIs for Git commands (`git gui`, `gitk`), particularly welcomed for Windows, as this platform is not natively well endowed for developers. 

### Git for Mac-OS-X.

Apple offers a version of Git through XCode, but we favor here a more recent version equipped with GUIs. Go on the [Git download](https://git-scm.com/downloads) webpage and pick the Mac-OS-X version. You will get a `dmg` file containing the installer and a useful README file.

### Testing Git installation and basic configuration.

Open a terminal and check that Git is properly installed with the paths set by typing: `git --version` in the shell. You should get something in line of 

	git version 2.6.4

It is a good idea to perform its basic configuration now. We want to tell it who we are and what is our email for instance. This is done with the `git config --global XXX` command:

```
git config --global user.email "you@yourdomain.com"
git config --global user.name "Your Name"
git config --global color.ui true
```
Then check that everything was properly recorded:
```
git config --list
```
----------


## Maven - the build automation tool.

Maven is the tool Fiji uses to build the code into an executable Java program. It does much more than simply compiling java files: it takes care of the dependencies of your software in an automated manner, but we have to comply to a certain organisation of the code. 

Maven is a software written in Java, so the installation procedure changes a little from what we are used to on our respective platforms. First go to the [download page of Maven](https://maven.apache.org/download.cgi) and pick one of the binary distribution (_e.g._ `apache-maven-x.y.z-bin.zip`). 

Unzip it and copy the whole ``apache-maven-x.y.z` folder somewhere convenient. For instance, I recommend creating a `Development` folder in your `home` that we will use as workspace for software development. We can put the Maven folder there.

We will use Maven from the command line, so we must add its executable to the shell path. Also, since Maven uses Java, we must properly declare where is the Java Development Kit we installed above. This requires some manipulation of the shell environment of your OS. In case of doubts, follow the instructions from the [Maven installation page](https://maven.apache.org/install.html). Here are some tips for common platforms.

### Maven on Mac-OS-X.

We will use the Mac-OS-X terminal, and the shell defaults to bash normally. Adding to the shell path can be done in the `.bash_profile` file in your home. To edit it, do something like this in a terminal:

```
cd # move to your home folder
vim .bash_profile # open an editor for bash_profile
```
Of course, the editor we use here is Vim, you might not like it. Any text editor will work. The important lines to add in the file are:

```
export PATH="$PATH:~/Development/Apache-maven-x.y.z/bin/"
```
this add the Maven `bin` folder to the shell path (or course, be mindful of the actual path to Maven and of the `x.y.z`), and:

```
export JAVA_HOME=/Library/Java/JavaVirtualMachines/jdk1.8.0_111.jdk/Contents/Home/
```
This creates a `JAVA_HOME` environment variable in the shell that points to the JDK home. This variable is used by Maven to run and compile Java programs. 

Once you did all of this, save the file and relaunch a terminal (so that the changes you made are read). In the new terminal, type `mvn -v`. You should get something like this:

```
Apache Maven 3.3.9 (bb52d8502b132ec0a5a3f4c09453c07478323dc5; 2015-11-10T17:41:47+01:00)
Maven home: /Users/tinevez/Development/Apache-maven-3.3.9
Java version: 1.8.0_111, vendor: Oracle Corporation
Java home: /Library/Java/JavaVirtualMachines/jdk1.8.0_74.jdk/Contents/Home/jre
Default locale: en_US, platform encoding: UTF-8
OS name: "mac os x", version: "10.11.6", arch: "x86_64", family: "mac"
```

### Maven on Windows.

On Windows, setting up properly the environment variables and the path is a little bit less simple. Depending on the version of Windows, the way to edit these changes. Here is a [useful tutorial](http://www.computerhope.com/issues/ch000549.htm) on who to do so. Then, please follow the instructions made by [Mkyong](https://www.mkyong.com/maven/how-to-install-maven-in-windows/) for the windows platform.

After doing so, log out and re-log in to your windows account to ensure the variable are sourced. Open the Git-BASH terminal provided by the Git for Windows tool we installed before, and type `mvn -v` to check that the Maven installation is correct.


### More on Maven.

The ImageJ website has a [page](http://imagej.net/Maven) that explains how we use it in the context of Fiji and friends, and have some useful links to explain how it works.


----------


## Installing Fiji for development.

We typically develop Fiji plugins as a single code base, and have Fiji components as dependencies. For the test and deployment of the plugin, it is a good idea to have a functional Fiji installation that will 'receive' the new plugin. We can then test it in an environment identical to what the user will have. 

Maven does this for you, provided you give it some small configuration tweaks and a Fiji installation somewhere sensible. 

For instance, here is an excerpt of my (JYT) `Development` folder (I am on a Mac):
```
tinevez@lilium:~/Development$ ls -1
	Fiji.app
	TrackMate
```

`TrackMate` is a folder containing the TrackMate code: 
```
tinevez@lilium:~/Development$ ls TrackMate
README.md pom.xml   samples   scripts   src       target
```
and `Fiji.app` is the folder of a normal Fiji Mac installation:
```
tinevez@lilium:~/Development$ ls Fiji.app/
Contents   WELCOME.md images     java       macros     retro
README.md  db.xml.gz  jars       luts       plugins    scripts
```

In my TrackMate `pom.xml` file (and in almost all of my plugins, and most of the Fiji plugins made by others), I specify that the parent pom is the Fiji pom:
```
<parent>
	<groupId>sc.fiji</groupId>
	<artifactId>pom-fiji</artifactId>
	<version>24.3.0</version>
	<relativePath />
</parent>
```
This brings plenty of very useful defaults and managed dependencies version. There is also a small section that tells where to copy the plugin jar once it has been compiled:
```
<properties>
	<!-- Target Fiji dir for clean upload. -->
	<imagej.app.directory>../Fiji.app/</imagej.app.directory>
</properties>
```
This tells Maven to install the compiled TrackMate version in the Fiji app in the `Development` folder. For instance, after compiling TrackMate with Maven, I get (amongst other things) the following message:
```
[INFO] --- imagej-maven-plugin:0.6.0:copy-jars (copy-jars) @ TrackMate_ ---
[INFO] Copying TrackMate_-3.4.3-SNAPSHOT.jar to ../Fiji.app/plugins
[INFO] Deleted overridden TrackMate_-3.4.2.jar
```
and the same for all TrackMate dependencies. 

We will see the structure of a sensible `pom.xml` file for a Fiji plugin later. Right now, we just have to prepare a development workspace and put a clean Fiji installation on it. I suggest emulating the example we just surveyed: 

- Have a `Development` folder in your home. 
- Unzip a clean installation of Fiji in it. 
- Run it to make sure it works.

We will use this setup later.

----------


## Eclipse - integrated development environment.

If you want to develop Java plugins (whether for Fiji or Icy or most of the open-source software for biological-imaging), it is likely that you will do so by spending 90% of your time in an integrated development environment (IDE). 

They are several of them out there, and most of them are very good and well supported. For this course we default to Eclipse, but if you use another one that you favor, simply skip this paragraph. 

Eclipse can do much more than just Java development, so we have to pick the right installer for us. Go on the [Eclipse download page](https://www.eclipse.org/downloads/) and pick the 64-bit installer package. This is just the Eclipse installer, not the software itself. 

Unzip it and run it. You are presented with a series of flavours of Eclipse. Pick *Eclipse IDE for Java Developers* (the first one), and select a sensible installation folder. Depending on the speed of transfer, installation may take several minutes.

When the installation is done, the installer shows a *LAUNCH* button. Click it. You are then asked for the location of the *workspace*. This is the folder on your hard-drive where all your Java projects (or other languages) are to be placed. With our convention, we decided to go for the `Development` folder mentioned above, where a `Fiji.app` already lives.

The [Eclipse page](http://imagej.net/Developing_ImageJ_in_Eclipse) on the ImageJ website recapitulates what we just saw and will help you getting started.


----------


## GitHub - Git repository hosting.

[GitHub](https://github.com/) is the online tool we use to host the code we generate. The whole stack of projects belonging to the ImageJ ecosystem lives there, and all Fiji developers have an account on GitHub.  Moving the source code there allowed us not only to have a decentralised hosting of the code, but also offered fantastic collaborative features such as _forks_, _pull requests_, _issue management_, _etc._

If you are considering developing code for the ImageJ ecosystem, it is a good idea to create an account on GitHub. We will use it during the course.
